Initial docs for file-based catalogs (#177)
operator-framework/olm-docs: content/en/docs/Tasks/creating-an-index.md

  Add/Remove a collection of bundles to/from an Index
---

## Prerequisites

> - [opm](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/releases) `v1.19.0+`

Reviewer: This is likely fine, but we haven't cut a 1.19.x release yet - any idea what version of opm introduced file-based configs? I know there's been a lot of recent changes around that behavior, so maybe choosing a newer version would be better?

Author: I originally used v1.18.0, but since there are now breaking changes between 1.18 and 1.19 for DC, I thought it would be better to take the hit with potential "version does not exist" questions vs "I updated from 1.18 to 1.19 and now everything is broken" questions.

Reviewer: Yeah that makes sense to me - thanks.

## Creating an Index

> `OLM`'s `CatalogSource` [CRD][catalogsource-crd] defines a reference to a catalog of operators that are available to

Reviewer: This resolves to a broken link

install onto a cluster. To make your operator bundle available, you can add the bundle to a container image which the

> `CatalogSource` points to. This image contains a record of bundle images that OLM can pull and extract the manifests

Reviewer: minor nit/not blocking: s/points to/references?

from in order to install an operator.

> OLM uses a plaintext [file-based catalog][file-based-catalog-spec] format (JSON or YAML) to store these records in an index, and `opm` has tooling

Reviewer: It looks like this also resolves to a broken link

through a simple example.

First, we need to initialize our index, so we'll make a directory for it, generate a Dockerfile that can build an index
image, and then populate our index with our package definition.

### Initialize the index
```sh
$ mkdir example-operator-index
$ opm alpha generate dockerfile example-operator-index
$ opm init example-operator \
    --default-channel=preview \
    --description=./README.md \
    --icon=./example-operator.svg \
    -output yaml > example-operator-index/index.yaml
```

Let's validate our index to see if we're ready to ship!
```sh
$ opm validate example-operator-index
FATA[0000] invalid index:
└── invalid package "example-operator":
    └── invalid channel "preview":
        └── channel must contain at least one bundle
```

Alright, so it's not valid. It looks like we need to add a bundle, so let's do
that next...

### Add a bundle to the index

```sh
$ opm render quay.io/example-inc/example-operator-bundle:v0.1.0 \
    --output=yaml > example-operator-index/index.yaml
```

Let's validate again:
```sh
$ opm validate example-operator-index
```

> Success! There were no errors and we got a `0` error code.

Reviewer: super minor nit/can be ignored completely: add a `$ echo $?` to show there was a zero return code?

In the general case, adding a bundle involves three discreet steps:

> - Render the bundle into the index using `opm render <bundleImage>`

Reviewer: super minor nit/can be ignored completely: add a trailing `.` here like the rest of the list elements?

- Add the bundle into desired channels and update the channels' upgrade edges
  to stitch the bundle into the correct place.
- Validate the resulting index.

> NOTE: Index metadata should be stored in a version control system (e.g. `git`) and index images should be rebuilt from source
whenever updates are made to ensure that all index changes are auditable.

**Step 1** is just a simple `opm render` command.

**Step 2** has no defined standards other than that the result must pass validation in step 3. Some operator authors may
decide to hand edit channels and upgrade edges. Others may decide to implement automation (e.g. to idempotently
build semver-based channels and upgrade graphs based solely on the versions of the operators in the package). There is
no right or wrong answer for implementing this step as long as `opm validate` is successful.

> There are some guidelines to keep in mind though:

Reviewer: :+1:

- Once a bundle is present in an index, you should assume that one of your users has installed it. With that in mind,
  you should take care to avoid stranding users that have that version installed. Put another way, make sure that
  all previously published bundles in an index have a path to the current/new channel head.
- Keep the semantics of the upgrade edges you use in mind. `opm validate` is not able to tell you if you have a sane
  upgrade graph. To learn more about the upgrade graph of an operator, checkout the

>   [creating an upgrade graph doc][upgrade-graph-doc]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [creating an upgrade graph doc][upgrade-graph-doc].
```

### Build and push the index image

Lastly, we can build and push our index:

```sh
$ docker build . \
    -f example-operator-index.Dockerfile \
    -t quay.io/example-inc/example-operator-index:latest
$ docker push quay.io/example-inc/example-operator-index:latest
```

> The resulting image is referred to as an `Index`. Now that image is available for clusters to use and reference with

Reviewer: Likely overkill given how often it's mentioned by link to the existing "Index" glossary term?

  Add/Remove a collection of bundles to/from an Index
---

## Prerequisites

- [opm](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/releases) `v1.19.0+`

## Creating an Index

> `OLM`'s `CatalogSource` [CRD][catalogsource-crd] defines a reference to a catalog of operators that are available to
> install onto a cluster. To make your operator bundle available, you can add the bundle to a container image which the
> `CatalogSource` references. This image contains a record of bundle images that OLM can pull and extract the manifests
> from in order to install an operator.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is a little confusing to me. How about this: 
```suggestion
`OLM`'s `CatalogSource` [CRD][catalogsource-crd] accepts a container image reference to a catalog of operators that can be made available to install onto a cluster. To add your operator bundle to a Catalog (and thereby make your operator bundle available to install in a cluster), you can add the bundle to a Catalog, package the Catalog in a container image, and then use that image reference in the `CatalogSource`. This image contains a record of bundle images that OLM can pull and extract the manifests
from in order to install an operator.
```

Author: I agree the original could be re-worded. I took most of what you wrote and made a few more of my own tweaks. Let me know what you think.

> OLM uses a plaintext [file-based catalog][file-based-catalog-spec] format (JSON or YAML) to store these records in an index, and `opm` has tooling

Reviewer 2: Again, same comment about the phrase as above.

> that helps initialize an index, render new records into it, and then validate that the index is valid. Let's walk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that helps initialize a Catalog, render new records into it, and then validate that the Catalog is valid. Let's walk
```

through a simple example.

> First, we need to initialize our index, so we'll make a directory for it, generate a Dockerfile that can build an index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we need to initialize our Catalog, so we'll make a directory for it, generate a Dockerfile that can build a Catalog
```

> image, and then populate our index with our package definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
image, and then populate our Catalog with our Operator in it.
```

> ### Initialize the index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Initialize the Catalog
```

```sh

> $ mkdir example-operator-index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ mkdir example-catalog
```

> $ opm alpha generate dockerfile example-operator-index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ opm alpha generate dockerfile example-catalog
```

$ opm init example-operator \
    --default-channel=preview \
    --description=./README.md \
    --icon=./example-operator.svg \
    --output yaml > example-operator-index/index.yaml
```

> Let's validate our index to see if we're ready to ship!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's validate our Catalog to see if we're ready to ship!
```

```sh

> $ opm validate example-operator-index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ opm validate example-catalog
```

> FATA[0000] invalid index:

Reviewer 2: Probably should change this error message in opm too to say catalog instead of index.

└── invalid package "example-operator":
    └── invalid channel "preview":
        └── channel must contain at least one bundle
```

> Alright, so it's not valid. It looks like we need to add a bundle, so let's do

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alright, so it's not valid. It looks like we need to add an operator bundle, so let's do
```

Author: I don't have a strong opinion here but to me this one seems unnecessary. A bundle is already a well-defined term for OLM and the thing we generate in the next section is an `olm.bundle` blob, not an `olm.operator.bundle` blob.

that next...

### Add a bundle to the index

```sh
$ opm render quay.io/example-inc/example-operator-bundle:v0.1.0 \

>     --output=yaml >> example-operator-index/index.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    --output=yaml >> example-catalog/catalog.yaml
```

```

Let's validate again:
```

> $ opm validate example-operator-index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ opm validate example-catalog
```

....I'll stop doing this now because I think I'm communicated my suggestion by now...

FATA[0000] package "example-operator", bundle "example-operator.v0.1.0" not found in any channel entries
```

### Add a channel entry for the bundle

> We rendered the bundle, but we still haven't yet added it to any channels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We rendered the operator bundle, but we still haven't yet added it to any channels.
```
